the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
Lewis structures so I tell students who
have sort of no background in chemistry
before they come into this class and
there always are some that there are
some topics in five eleven one that
having no experience with this with the
topic is actually a good thing and Lewis
structures is one of these things I
think if you've seen it before you're
like oh yeah that's easy I know how to
do that you don't practice and you get
on an exam and you're like oh wait a
minute I forgot how to do this and the
students who haven't seen it before know
all the rules and just yet brilliant
perfect scores on the exam and the other
students are like man I forgot how to do
my lewis structures so here are Lewis
structures we're going to go over them
so I really like Lewis structures
because they're relatively simple and
they work like 90 percent of the time
they are the correct structure and I'm a
big fan of simple things working if you
wanted to get from a hunt ninety percent
to a hundred percent you'd have to you
know use Schrodinger's equation but you
can get ninety percent just with the
simple Lewis structures I'm a big fan of
that I love it when simple things really
work pretty well okay so in Lewis
structures the key to this is thinking
about the electrons being shared so that
you get a full valence shell and having
the electrons distributed in such a way
that all of the atoms have the number of
electrons that make them happy which is
usually eight electrons which is an
octet that noble gas configuration so
every dot in a Lewis structure
represents a valence electron and we can
then look at some atoms and put dots
around them to indicate the number of
valence electrons so we also have to
know how many valence electrons atoms
have and so why don't you just practice
with that with a clicker question
and here's the part of the periodic
table up here if you need it
alright I'm told 10 seconds everyone was
crazy fast yes so 7 is the correct
answer you can look at the periodic
table and sometimes with these it's a
counting thing so this is one where you
where you want to always double check
whether if things don't make sense
alright so we can put 7 electrons around
fluorine and we'll have two fluorines
here they'll both have 7 electrons
around them and now I'm gonna jump to
another slide but I'm gonna show you the
7 again in case you haven't written them
down if you don't want to they're not in
your handout but if that's probably okay
so when you bring them together you can
bring them together in such a way that
they can all share and so if we put in
green then one of the fluorines of 7 and
then we put in blue the other fluorine 7
you can see that they can share two in
the middle and both are very very happy
so just thinking about this really
simple idea how many electrons will give
you an octet will give you eight and how
can you put things together in such a
way that allows for that to happen now
there are a few atoms that are elements
that do not want eight in their valence
shell and hydrogen is one of them it
just has that one s so it only wants two
that's all I can handle so this is an
exception hydrogen is going to want two
electrons hydrogen loves to interact
with things though it interacts with
lots and lots of things and here
hydrogen with its one valence electron
is interacting with chlorine with its
seven valence electrons and they are
sharing two electrons forming a bond
together so when we're talking about
Lewis structures we're talking about
different kinds
electrons so we are talking about
bonding electrons the electrons that are
involved in the bond and also lone pair
electrons so chloride in HCl is going to
have two bonding electrons one was its
and one came from hydrogen and it's also
going to have six lone pair electrons or
we could say three lone pairs so when we
say a lone pair that indicates two
electrons there so it has one two three
four five six or one pair two pairs
three pairs now there are rules to Lewis
structures and here is the complete rule
and your handout this wouldn't fit on
one page it's on two pages and these
rules if you do work these problems you
will remember these rules and they
become pretty easy but it's important to
work Lewis structure problems so that
they the rules become really familiar to
you and it takes time to work Lewis
structure problems so don't wait to the
last minute to start this problem set
there's a lot of Lewis structure
problems on it which means it's not
difficult but it's gonna take some time
all right so let's briefly go over these
rules first what you want to do is draw
the skeleton structure just put the
atoms down hydrogen and fluorine are
always going to be terminal atoms don't
put them in the middle of a molecule of
that gets chemistry professors really
upset to see hydrogen in the middle with
lots of bonds to things so don't do it
and typically the element with the
lowest ionization energy goes in the
middle and there are some exceptions and
we'll see some of those exceptions but
that's that should be your first guess
you want to count the number of valence
electrons if there's a negative charge
you need to count that in or if there's
a positive charge you need to subtract
that from the total then you want to
figure out the total number of electrons
needed so everyone has their full
valence shell you need to subtract these
two to get the number of bonding
electrons and here
some of the things that it's really easy
to make math mistakes here so if your
structure makes zero sense at the end go
back and check your math assign two
bonding electrons to each bond if any
remain you want to think about whether
you have double or triple bonds and
there's only certain kinds of atoms that
can have double and triple bonds so be
careful where you're putting your double
and triple bonds if any valence
electrons remain those are lone pairs
and then lastly you want to figure out
the formal charge on all the atoms in
your structure to make sure that this is
a valid structure and we're going to
talk about formal charge so first let's
just try an example and your sheet has
two examples on the same page we have
HCN and we also have CN minus so we're
gonna do HCN first so don't fill your
entire page because you're gonna have to
write things for CN minus as well but
before we start we need to figure out
which atom is likely going to be in the
middle and so why don't you tell me what
you think on the clicker question
okay ten more seconds
yep so here again we want to have one
that has the lower ionization energy and
you also want to consider other things
like hydrogen can't be in the middle
okay and it was written that way but
sometimes they're written in a way that
is not as straightforward okay
so I'll put that up all right so we'll
go through the rules and we'll try to
work this out so first I can write I'm
gonna start it so right over here so
number one we're just going to write HC
n with C in the middle so that's the
first thing we're going to do next we're
going to consider the valence electrons
and you can just help me out by yelling
things out how many valence electrons
does hydrogen have what about carbon
nitrogen and you can always check me on
my math how much does that equal
excellent
there's nothing like adding simple
numbers in front of 350 people to really
put the stress in one's day okay so to
have a complete full valence shell what
do I need for hydrogen what about carbon
eight to be complete nitrogen a and I
think if we add this up we should get 18
how's that alright so for for now we're
going to subtract these numbers from
each other to tell us how many bonding
electrons we have so we have 18 minus 10
and we should have eight bonding
electrons for five I'm going to now
assign two per bond so I'm going to put
one here another here another here
another here so I've assigned two per
bond and now I see if I have any left do
I have some left I've used for I had
eight so yes I have four more and if you
have more bonding electrons
then you are supposed to assign those
bonding electrons and think about
whether it's allowed to have double or
triple bonds can hydrogen be involved in
the double-bond no carbon nitrogen yes
or a triple bond so I have four more so
I'm going to put one two three four so
I'm going to have a triple bond between
my carbon and my nitrogen and now I'm
good so now I want to see do I have any
extra electrons so for this I had eight
I mean I had ten I used eight so I have
two left so I'm going to assign those
two as a lone pair should I put them on
hydrogen what about carbon no carbon
already has it's eight because it has a
it has four bonds so then I'm going to
put it on nitrogen and then the only
thing left is formal charge which we
haven't talked about yet so before we do
formal charge I just want to do this
same thing with CN - and I will say if
you want to draw triple bonds that's
fine too you don't have to indicate the
dots as as bonds it's perfectly fine to
write out a triple bond so I could have
written this as well okay so let's look
at C and - so how many how many valence
electrons does carbon have again for
nitrogen five and by done no I need to
add one because there's a charge on this
molecule of minus one so so now so I
have ten again three I'm going to figure
out how many electrons I need to
complete my valence shell how many from
carbon
eight nitrogen eight so now I have
sixteen I will subtract now sixteen and
our ten from sixteen and get six bonding
electrons and I'm going to assign first
just two of them so I'll assign one to
here and then we this is to assign six
said you have any left over I had six
and I only use two so the answer is yes
I have four more so I can put those in
one two three four again we're going to
have a triple bond and then we ask are
there any electrons left so we had ten
we used six of them and so we're going
to have now four more here so now I can
assign this only has this is not
complete for carbon so I can put a lone
pair on carbon and I can put a lone pair
on nitrogen and now they have their
complete octet and we get to assign
formal charge so I could write it this
way
or I could have written it with a triple
bond here and don't forget to put the
charge on the end all right so now let's
consider formal charge because we're
never done with our MUOS structures
until we've considered formal charge so
formal charge is a measure of the extent
to which the atom is really kind of lost
or gained an electron in the process of
make forming this covalent bond
so as we'll talk about it's not the same
as oxidation number we have like sodium
plus 1 but there's again there's there's
a there's some differences and how many
are brought to the table and what it
ends up with in the end so there's an
equation which you'll have to learn but
if you do enough of these problems it'll
be stuck in your brain and you can't
purge it even if you want to
and so formal charge FC is equal to the
number of valence electrons symbol V
here minus the number of lone pair
electrons minus half of the number of
bonding electrons so at least this
equation makes sense if you forget what
they mean you can probably think about
it and it'll come back to you so in
doing these formal charges you want the
formal charges to add up to the charge
on the molecule so if we had HC n that's
a neutral molecule so the sum of all of
the formal charges must be zero or you
did something wrong if it's CN minus the
sum of the formal charges has to add up
to minus one or you did something wrong
so this is a good way of checking your
math so always remember that the sum
needs to add up to the total charge on
the molecule if you remember that that's
a really good check to make sure you
didn't make some kind of weird math
mistake and add things wrong and have an
appropriate number of lone pairs or
something going on okay so let's
calculate formal charge now on our CN
minus molecule up here so the formal
charge now on carbon here so how many
valence electrons to carbon have four
how many lone pairs does it have it has
one lone pair two lone pair electrons
this is a total number of lone pair
electrons here and then half the number
of bonding electrons so it has six
bonding electrons and half of that is
three and so that should add up to a
charge a minus one you can also instead
of thinking half the number of bonding
electrons you can also just think about
number of bonds if you want to do this
alright so see if you have the hang of
it let's do a clicker question
okay ten more seconds
okay most people got that right I can't
actually read the number but that was
very good
it always seems wrong to put zero is the
answer but that is in fact the answer
here so if we look at this again we have
five five valence electrons on nitrogen
we have two lone pair electrons and we
have six bonding electrons half of 6 is
3 and so that's 0 or you could have said
well if this is minus 1 and the charge
is minus 1 then that have to have been 0
otherwise professor Drennan did
something wrong and that's just not
possible so the answer there would be 0
and you can see that the total charge of
total formal charge is minus 1 and the
total charge of the molecule is also
minus 1 so again formal charge does not
equal oxidation number it's something
special it tells you kind of in this
arrangement of atoms in the molecule did
this atom kind of come up with a little
bit more at the end or a little bit less
depending on where it started from
and where it is and we want in these
structures for the formal charge to be
low so we can use formal charge to
decide between Lewis structures so the
structures with the lowest absolute
values of this formal charge are more
stable structures so if you have really
high state formal charges that means
that molecule isn't really very stable
because you want low charges you want
lower energy you want things to be to be
in a more neutral and happy state so we
want to figure out which ones are going
to have low charges so let's look at
another example
kiyo cyanide ion and it has a carbon
sulfur and nitrogen in it and it has a
charge of minus 1 so I might tell you
the ionization energies for carbon
sulfur and nitrogen and then ask you
which atom do you think is going to be
in the center of the molecule so what do
you think what's in the center
this molecule based on those numbers
just yell it out
sulfur so sulfur has the lowest
ionization energy and I told you that's
usually the thing in the center but you
can start with that
it's a goalies good to start with that
but then you want to check the structure
and make sure that a structure with
sulfur in the middle has the lowest
formal charge so let's take a look at
that so we can draw structure a with
sulfur in the middle and then calculate
the formal charges on that and if we do
that we see for the nitrogen here
nitrogen has five valence electrons it
has four lone pair electrons and it has
half of four bonding electrons so it
would have a charge a formal charge of
minus one in this particular structure
that has sulfur in the middle we can
look at carbon carbon has four valence
electrons for lone pair electrons and
half of four bonding electrons so it has
a charge of minus two then we can look
at sulfur sulfur has six valence
electrons zero lone pairs and half of
eight bonding electrons so it has a
formal charge of plus two so overall
this does equal the minus one so it's a
valid structure but is that the lowest
energy one we also could put carbon in
the middle or nitrogen in the middle so
let's look at what this does for us so
with the formal charge on nitrogen now
we have five minus four lone pair
electrons minus half of four bonding
electrons minus one so that's the same
now we can look at carbon we have now
just no lone pair electrons it has four
minus zero minus four half of eight
bonding electrons or zero and four
sulfur six minus four lone pair
electrons and half of four bonding
electrons or
zero next structure.c 5-0 lone pairs
minus half of eight plus one so that
one's different
carbon we have four valence electrons
minus four lone pairs minus half of for
bonding minus 2 and for the sulfur 6-4
lone pairs electrons half of 4 or 0 so
now with the clicker tell me which is
most stable
alright 10 seconds
I think this can be 98% that's what I'm
thinking I'm feeling good well close
yeah
what no no sorry
it should be be
yeah it should be be yeah sorry
I actually hey there we go yeah be is
correct so if we just look at it over
here it has the lowest number of formal
charges so the answer is B
okay let's uh let's start with this
simply who wants to tell me why one how
they could look at this and realize one
was not the correct answer I think this
is on give it a try
ones not correct because if you look
back at your atomic radius chart this is
pretty much doing the exact opposite of
that yep
so helium definitely not the biggest
atom there is okay so so six got a lot
of attention and and so did two and
ionization energy electron affinity and
electronegativity are definitely
connected to each other but there is a
clue that electron affinity is would not
be the correct Oh someone want to say
what you might have noticed for electron
affinity increases and then stops at the
noble gases because noble gases do not
want electrons so in this particular
chart all the noble gases are like the
highest are the highest ones in the
relative area which would mean that
electron affinity will be incorrect yep
that's right so the noble gases were the
clue
so thanks yeah and so if electron
affinity also is not high at the noble
gases they're also not electronegative
noble gases just don't want extra light
they don't want to lose electrons they
don't gain electrons they just want to
be left alone so that's a this trend is
for ionization energy and because noble
gases want to be left alone they don't
want to lose any of their electrons
great so this is this is good to be
thinking about because we're finishing
up now for the handout from last time
and we're gonna be talking about
electronegativity again we never moved
very far away from a lot of these topics
they just keep coming back so we just
keep ER
doing them alright I don't need two
microphones although I don't know I kind
of like kind of like having this one
anyway so let's take out the handout
from last time and let's finish it up we
were talking about formal charge and we
had looked at examples where we
calculated formal charge and then we
looked at which structure would be
lowest in energy and that was the
structure where you had the least
separation between the charges on them
so the smallest absolute numbers if you
have formal charges of zero that's
fantastic that's what the molecule wants
minus one plus one if you must but when
you start having plus two minus two
that's a lot of charge separation so
that's less favorable so we're going to
have more examples of that as we go
along but now what if you had calculated
formal charge and and they're all the
same how do you know which structure is
correct so what if you have and this is
just some people are having trouble this
is the top of page four from the handout
you have two valid Lewis structures how
that have the same formal charge how do
you know where it goes and the answer is
that the negative formal charge should
go on the most electronegative atom and
so that's why we're sort of talking
about electronegativity again and so
electronegativity remember
electronegativity is high when the
electron affinity is high meaning that
the atom wants to get an electron has a
high affinity for electrons and also
high ionization energy which means it
doesn't want to give up its electrons so
that's something it likes to have
electrons and so you want to put a
negative value which indicates there's
more electrons on something that's
electronegative so negative on negative
over here and so that's what you're
looking for that's how you're going to
make a decision so let's look at an
example so here is a molecule and we're
going to look at two possible Lewis
structures of this with similar formal
charges
and decide which is the correct
structure so first let me give you a
couple hints that can be useful in
problem sets and in exams when you see
ch3
that's a methyl group and that's going
to be terminal so you're gonna have
these three hydrogen's associated with
that carbon and that's going to be at an
end of the molecule so it could look
like one of these two things so we have
the carbon we have attached to three
hydrogen's a carbon attached to three
hydrogen's and then attached to
something else this nitrogen here and
this structure where it's just kind of
written out in a line or a chain of
atoms or you call chain molecules
sometimes often the atoms are actually
written in the order in which they're
attached so that's definitely true here
ch3 three hydrogen's attached to the
carbon so they're attached to the atom
that came before in the chain the
nitrogen is also going to be attached to
the carbon even though it follows the
hydrogen you're not gonna have hydrogen
in the middle of a bond it's not going
to be bonded to two things hydrogen's
always terminal so even though
nitrogen's here it's got to be attached
to the carbon so we have three
hydrogen's and then a bond between the
carbon and the nitrogen now we have a
hydrogen after the nitrogen and by this
rule it should go on the nitrogen but
you might want to double check that
that's true and then we have an oxygen
again the oxygen is going to have a bond
with the nitrogen you're not going to
have a bond with hydrogen in the middle
hydrogen's always terminal so the only
real choice we have here is we can put
the hydrogen on nitrogen or we can put
the hydrogen on the oxygen here and so
we can use use this rule about
electronegativity and formal charges to
figure out which of these structures is
right so in this particular case all of
the formal charges are zero on all of
the atoms except there's one minus one
charge and in this structure the minus
one charge would be on the oxygen and in
this structure the minus one
would be on the nitrogen and if
everything else is zero then you have
the sum of your formal charges minus one
equal to the charge on the molecule
which is minus one so both of these are
valid structures both have low values of
formal charge which is right so it's
going to be the structure that has the
negative charge on the most
electronegative atom is the right
structure and so here you need to
remember you know some of your rules
about electronegativity and in terms of
electronegativity we see that oxygen has
greater electronegativity than the
nitrogen and so that's where we would
want to put our negative charge on the
negative charge goes on the atom that's
the most electronegative and that would
generate the lower energy structure so
if you're given a table of
electronegativities which you often are
you can look it up and validate that
that's going to be the correct place and
in fact experimentally we know that
that's the right structure so that that
works so if you have two structures
identical formal charges valid
structures then the last step is to
think about where that negative charge
should go and pick the atom that is the
most electronegative all right we have
one more thing we need to talk about in
Lewis structures before we start
violating various rules that we've
learned and that is that we need to talk
about resonance structures and so to
explain to you what a resonance
structure is it's really helpful to
start with an example so that's what
we're gonna do and we're gonna consider
ozone which is three atoms of oxygen and
we have the ozone layer which protects
us from UV damage and is very valuable
and we should not destroy it with
chemicals being released into the
environment and because you don't have
complete say over that always wear
sunscreen okay so let's let's build up
these Lewis structures and then consider
what's meant by a resonance structure so
here we have
part of the periodic table that you're
going to need and we need to think first
about the valence electrons so oxygen
has six valence electrons and there are
three oxygens so that's 18 to get a full
octet for each of the oxygens three
oxygens and octet is eight valence
electrons so that would be 24 to figure
out the number of bonding electrons
we're going to be subtracting our octet
electrons from our valence electrons so
24 minus 18 is 6 and then our next step
is to assign those bonding electrons two
at a time to her bond so let's take a
look at that we can put one bond here
between these two oxygens one bond here
between these two oxygens and then ask
do we have any more and we do because we
had six bonding electrons we used four
so we have two more bonding electrons so
we need to make a double bond but now we
have the question of where to make that
double bond am I going to put it between
these two oxygens or am I going to put
it between those two oxygens and so I
could say put it there but I could also
instructor to put the double bond over
here all right we'll come back to that
question in a minute let's first figure
out if we have any remaining valence
electrons and we do so we had we had 18
and we've only used six so we have 12
left so we're going to put those in as
lone pairs and so I can put them in over
here one set here 1 2 3 4 5 6 and I can
also do that over here 1 2 3 4 5 6 and
now we have two structures so we need to
think about formal charges to see if
that can help differentiate structure 1
from structure tip ok and let's look at
that sure everyone's ready and that is a
caution so I'll put that back up
alright let's just take 10 more seconds
and we'll talk about what the what the
right answer is and a little bit of a
trick for doing these perhaps a bit
faster
okay so that was pretty good so let's
look at why that's the right answer and
we'll take a look at that over here so
let's do the calculations so you have to
remember the equation for formal charge
for sure and once you do enough for
problems that should stick in your head
pretty easily so if we look over here so
this is the formal charge on oxygen a
and there were six valence electrons
there are four lone pair electrons minus
half of the bonding electrons there
eight bonding electrons so that's two so
that's a formal charge of zero for
oxygen B over here again have six
valence electrons and we have two lone
pair electrons we have six bonding
electrons so half of 6 is 3 which is
plus 1 and on oxygen C over here
6 minus 6 lone pair electrons half of 1
bond so half of 2 is 1 minus 1 overall
the charge here is neutral and that's
good because it's a neutral molecule so
to do this structure faster you have to
realize that oxygen a over here is the
same as C over there so you can just
copy down what you had for C is now a B
is exactly the same in the two structure
so it's the same as what you calculated
and now this C was the same as this a so
we can put that same value that we
calculated for a into C so they're both
the same same formal charges which
structure is correct and the answer is
both of them and in fact you need both
of them so there's data chemists love
data and the data is that the bonds are
actually equivalent in the molecule so
it isn't that there's one double bond in
one single bond there's just one kind of
bond
in Ozone and it's between a single and a
double bond and so this is how one would
draw that kind of thing you would have
structure one here and structure 2 here
you would put them both in brackets and
you would put this special double-headed
arrow between them and that indicates
that both of these structures are needed
to describe the properties of the
molecule you do not have a stationary
double bond and a single bond you have
kind of a mixture between these two and
that's what a resonance structure is so
let's take a little bit more of a look
at this so this is just what I had
before the experimental evidence is that
the bonds are equivalent
there isn't a double and a single
there's something in between a 1 and a
half and this is called a resonance
hybrid and it's a blend of these two
structures so this structure is blended
with that structure so some of you are
aware of hybrids from biology and now
with cars so a mule would be an example
and if you're thinking about what a mule
is you don't walk out into your barn
yard one day and see a donkey one day
and they go out the next day and you see
a horse a mule is a hybrid between a
donkey and a horse so if you were a
chemist you would do this you would put
the donkey in brackets and the horse in
brackets and put your double-headed
arrow and if you see this you'd say oh
yes a mule so that is what this is both
structures are needed to describe ozone
one structure enough isn't enough you
need both of them they're in resonance
with each other and so what's true about
the electrons in a zone is that they're
delocalized across the across all of
these bonds so there isn't like a double
and a single all of those electrons are
delocalized they're shared over this set
of atoms and you can have two resonance
structures you can have three you can
have four it depends on the molecule in
question and in all those cases those
electrons would be delocalized so just
to kind of sum that up resident
structures two or more same arrangement
of atoms and that's important it's the
electrons that are different and this is
an in your handout but just think about
this for a second because it wasn't your
handout a minute ago are these resonance
structures no they are not resonance
structures the atoms are in different
positions so one of these structures is
right one of these structures is wrong
with resonance structures they're both
correct and both needed to define the
structure so pay attention this is a
common mistake
pay attention ask yourself for the atoms
in a different position that's not
residence you're just looking atoms are
the same formal charge of the same
you're just looking at whether you have
different arrangements of electrons